# Python_Learning
Welcome to the Python_Learning repository! 🐍  This repository is your go-to resource for mastering Python programming. Whether you're a beginner or looking to enhance your skills, you'll find a curated collection of Python projects, exercises, and resources to accelerate your learning journey.

# Lecture 1
 Hi coders and welcome to the complete Python series in which we will be covering Python language. After completing this series, if our interest is in artificial intelligence, machine learning, data science field, then we will be able to learn machine learning. Or if we want to go to the web development domain later, we want to work on frameworks like Django, we want to make websites, then we will be able to learn that too. In this series, we will be reading in such a way that today it may be possible that we do not know to write even one line of code. But after completing the series, we will be able to write good programs. Plus there are many such concepts of programming which we have learned and we have applied them. Now whenever we talk about Python, for the past many years, Python has been the most loved language in the tech industry. There are many such good programmers who start their programming journey, coding journey with Python. And it is also one of the easiest language to start coding with. And that's why we will also start our coding journey with Python. To start this Python series, there are no prerequisites. That is, if we have not written any code in any other coding language then it's absolutely fine we will be starting things with zero level and gradually we will be upgrading our level in programming in our series, in our lectures we will be studying theory concepts but along with that we will be writing a lot of code to practice things to get hands on practical experience and along with that we will be solving practice questions related to every important topic and along with this you will be getting the links of all the slides and notes of the series in the description box below so let's start with the lecture 1 of our Python series in which we will cover introduction to Python in this we will cover the concept of taking input and output in Python, what are the variables, what are the data types and what are the operators we will be covering all these concepts in our lecture 1 now let's talk about what is programming? Two major components are involved in programming. One is that we have a machine. This machine can be our laptop or computer. And the second thing we have is code. And what we do is we write code and give instructions to a machine which we call a program. That is, if I have to do something from my laptop or computer, then I will give instructions to it. Now the computer does not understand Hindi, English, Nepali, Marathi, all these languages like us. So that's why we call it Python, Java, C++, JavaScript, we call it to do the work in these languages. Now we can understand it as if we went to France. If we are going to France, we will have to speak French there. If we are going to Nepal, we will have to speak Nepali there. If I am going to Maharashtra, I will have to speak Marathi. Similarly, if I want to talk to the computer, I will have to talk to the language that the computer understands. So that's why we use programming languages. In which languages we talk to the computer Now there are many programming languages Java, C++, Javascript can also be there And here the programming language we are reading We call it Python That means whatever code we write To work with computer, laptop Basically to work with our machine All, basically to work from machine all that code will be in Python but there is a small twist in this also now machine can't understand Hindi, English, Marathi computer can't understand Python directly because Python is a very easy language Java, C++, C are very easy languages which we understand as humans computers or machine understand language of 0 and 1 means machine only understands numbers how it can understand numbers in numbers only 0 and 1 in form of high voltage and low voltage means in machine if you pass high current it will understand it as 1 and in machine no current will pass it will understand it as 0 it is a basic electronics so that's why we wrote our code in python which looks like English but to explain that code to the machine we have translators in between like if I go to France and I don't know how to speak French then I will take a translator or guide with me who will translate my English or my Hindi into French the computers which understand the language of 01 the work of translator is that our python will take and translate that python in the machine language That's why we call python as a high level language So the work of translators is to directly convert high level language into low level languages or into machine level languages These can be our translator compilers or interpreters. So, there is an interpreter inside Python which translates our Python code into machine form. So, from here we have clear that whenever I have to do something from my computer or machine, I have to write the code of Python. Now let's talk about what is Python. Before understanding Python, there are some basic features about which we should know. First thing is that Python is very simple and easy to understand. Means there are so many surveys every year in which it is said that Python is one of the easiest languages to start with programming or to start with coding as a beginner. So for beginners, if you want to start coding in Python, then we feel it is like English, that's why it is simple and easy to understand. Second is that Python is free and open source. It means anyone can use Python. In general, many programming languages are free, but many programming languages are paid too. But Python is a free language, anyone can use it. You can do it, I can also use it for free. And third is that Python is a high level language. There are some changes that can't be done directly at the machine level, but it is easy to understand for humans. Now these engineers had developed Python, Guido and Rossum, first they used to work in Google, now they are engineers in my ex-company Microsoft, distinguished engineer, means they have been given a very special degree. So they had made Python, and along with this Python is a portable language. Meaning the Python code you can write in your windows, that Python code your friend can run in their Mac OS, means in Apple's computer. And the same Python code your other friend can run in their Linux system. So Python is same according to different operating systems, that code is also same and that code can run in all the different operating systems. Apart from this, by using Python, we can explore many different branches of programming. Meaning, by using Python, I can go into my data science, I can learn machine learning, I can learn AI, along with that, I can also do web development, I can make websites, so in the backend, we are using a framework of Python called Django. And we can make our games using Python, so there can be a lot of things using Python. So it is a very versatile language by which we explore different areas of programming and work on them. So let's start with our first program in Python. We talked a lot about the code in Python, Python is a versatile language, Python is an open source language, and we talked about coding and machine. But what does code actually mean? What does it mean when I say that we write code in Python? So to understand that, we are going to write our first program or first code in Python. Now before writing the code of Python, we have to download two things in our system. First of all, we have to download Python in our system and after that we have to download Visual Studio Code in our system. We definitely need Python because we want that when we write the code of Python in our system, it can recognize the code of Python, run it and execute it. And we are downloading Visual Studio Code because it is going to be a digital notebook. Till now, in school and college, all the things we have written and studied, we used to do it on notebooks. But we cannot write code with a paper pen. The correct way to write code and run it is to write it in our code editors. And Visual Studio Code is one of the best freely available editors out there. So that's why we are using VS Code. Now first of all, we will be looking at the installation of Python for Windows. After that, we will be looking at the installation of Python for Mac OS. And then finally, we will download Visual Studio Code for both Mac and Windows. Now for the installation of Python on Windows, first of all, we can go to our browser browser we can go to chrome and we can search for download python for windows We have to go to the link which will come on top of the top we have to click on it This link will be of python.org when we will go to this link then we will have a big yellow button on which download python 3.1 2.1 is coming. If we are watching this lecture later, then it is possible that we have updated the python version and there is a latest version available there. So, if we want, we can download a different version too. Then also we can follow our lecture completely. If we want, we can click on this download button. Otherwise, the downloads written above, after going there, we will get the python option. We will click on it and our Python download will start. As soon as our download is completed, we can double click on our exe file if we want. We will get a window like this in which we will click on run and our installation will start. Now before starting the installation, we have two check boxes on the top of the window which we have to check always. The first one is for admin privileges which we will tick and the second one is for python.exe which we have to tick. After ticking, we will click on our install now and our installation will start. After installation is complete, we will get setup was successful and we can simply close this window. Now next we are going to download Python for macOS. We can go to our browser inside macOS and we can search for python.org slash downloads. From here, the yellow button that will come to us to download, we will have the latest version of python coming on it. We can click here and start our python download. If you want to see the lecture later, then you may have more updated version and latest version available. So if we want we can download that latest version too. We will not have any problem in following the whole lecture. We have to download, if we want we can save our package in downloads. As soon as it is downloaded, we will double click on our package and we will get our installation window. To install, we can click on continue. After continuing, we will agree. Then we will get a window to enter our password. We will enter our password in it and we are going to install the software. And as soon as Python is installed, we can close this window. After closing the window, we can go and keep the installer or we can move it to the bin. Now if we want to verify whether Python python is installed in our system or not. So for that there is one way that we can open our terminal. And in the terminal we can type this command python3 dash dash version. As soon as we enter this, we will have the python currently installed version printed. By which it is verified that python has successfully been installed in our system. This same command will work in Mac and we can run this same command in Windows. Now next we are going to install Visual Studio Code in our system. So first of all, to download it, we will search on the internet, download vs code. So we have to go to the first link here I will tell you the site also code.visualstudio.com slash download now there are many options in this now you are on windows machine windows 7,8,10,11 so here according to your system if it is a 64 bit system then which one you have to, if it is 32 bit, then which one to download. Mostly people have a 64 bit system, so you can click here and download it. If you are on Linux, then you can download according to that or if you are on Mac, then you can download according to that. Now whenever you download for Windows, then many check boxes will come in the middle for us. What we have to do is tick all these checkboxes. As soon as we tick, our Visual Studio Code will be installed completely. And now we can open it for the first time. Now once I have installed Python and Code Editor inside the system, I am going to open my Visual Studio Code. I am working on Mac OS, so my Visual Studio Code window is looking something like this. If you are on Windows operating system or you are on Linux operating system, then also your window will look like this. Means as soon as you click on Visual Studio Code, some screen will appear for you. You will not have this recent section because I have Visual Studio Code installed for a long time. But if you have installed it new, then you will only have this start window. Now whatever things I am going to do in my macOS, you can do it on your windows also So whatever I am going to do here, the same steps we have to follow to run our python code First of all I will click on new file and then I will click on text file So what happened for me, a text file has been created Means as the file is created in our system, I cross it. Here is the file symbol, explorer. By clicking on the explorer, I will know which folder I am on. Here I can see that I have not made any folder yet. Here folder means where my file is being saved. And if you click on explorer again, then it will also be closed. What I am going to do, first of all I will save this file. To save, I press command S or control S, you will click on the explorer again then it will be closed. What I am going to do is first of all I will save this file. To save I will press command S or control S you can click. To save I am going to give the name of the file here. I will name it first program dot py. Now whatever Python files we make, at the end of them we have to write dot py. This is the name of my first program And what is.py?.py is an extension Like if I want to make a text file Then I write.txt If I want to make a java file Then I write.java If I want to make a C++ file Then I write.cpp Similarly if I want to make a python file in programming Then I will write.py at the end By doing.py you can either make a new folder Or you can save it in any folder. I am going to save it in this Python folder. So what happened here? I will see that my file name is firstprogram.py. Where is this file? It is a folder named Shraddha Kapra. It has a Python folder in it. In that, my firstprogram.py file is there. And this is my Python icon. So now I am going to write a line in this file. Now what does this line mean or what does it mean to write words? We this file Now what is the meaning of this line or what is the meaning of the words I am writing We don't have to pay much attention to that I am going to click print and then I have put double quotes And I wrote hello world So I have done this here, save the file And on the right side you will see this run button Run Python file, I will click on this As soon as I clicked, a window appeared below, In which I have this line, hello world, printed as it is, What I did is basically I wrote a Python code, That is, inside Python, on the screen, which is below, Which is my output screen, I have to print anything on it, For that, I can write this line, and whatever I have to print inside double quotes, I can write that, usually I can write whatever I want to print in double quotes. Usually when we start a new programming language, we write hello world. So writing hello world is a little custom. You will write Java's program, C++, any language, we start with hello world. Now it is not necessary that I write hello world here. I can also write my name here. So if I write my name and run my code again, then this time my name is printed for me. Now if I write my college here, then I can print this too. So I have my college output. So this is my first program in Python. Now let's understand what were the different components of the first program. In the first program we wrote print hello world. Now this print is the name of a function inside the print python. Now we don't have to go into detail about how to implement the functions. Basically I have to understand that I have given some command to it. The purpose of functions is to complete some work. So the work of this print function is to print anything on the screen You will write print and put parentheses here And will put double quotes So whatever you will write inside will be printed on our screen as it is If I want, I can write my college by cutting this whole hello world So my college will be printed on the whole screen And in the same way, you can write your name, then your name will also be printed on the screen. And this is called the output inside Python. Output means the one that is printed and written on my screen and I can see it. Now if we come to understand the fundamentals of any code, then what does any code do? Let's assume I have written any code. Here we are always going to write Python code So any code takes some input and returns some output to me Like if I understand it from a very simple example So we must have searched Google What do we do in Google search? Whatever I have to search, we type it Let's assume that I have to search news So I will type news Now here in Google search Whatever I have to search I, then I will type news. Now here in Google search, whatever I have to search, I have given input to Google search in a way and the result it will bring for me will be output. So Google search, Google must have written some code with the help of which input is taken and output is returned for it. So now what we are printing is the output of my code. Slowly we will learn that what other changes we can do in this Python code and how the input is taken in Python. Now let's talk about the character set of Python. We can use different characters in Python. Like in English I know that from A to Z and from small a to small z I have an alphabet. In Hindi I know that A, E, E in this way our letters are going, similarly python has its own character set, means you can't use extra characters other than this, means it's not like you will bring a Punjabi letter, you will try to type it, or we will bring a Marathi letter, so in this way different languages ​​letters do not work, python has a fixed character set, in python we can use English capital A to capital Z, small a to small z. Apart from that in letters we can use all digits from 0 to 9. In special symbols we have minus plus, hyphen, multiply, divide, percentage, we can use all the special characters present on our keyboard. We can also use white spaces, that means if I want to give a blank space, a tab space Then we can use them And other than that In ASCA and Unicode characters We can use all our data or literals We will not go into much detail about this The basic keys present on our keyboard And the characters and numbers we use in English All of them are valid in Python So that's why Python is called The closest language of English. And if you see the instructions in it, then all the code that we are writing, it will be very simple and easy to understand. Now, as I wrote this print statement, so it is clear by looking at the print statement, even if someone does not know how to write code, that what is the work of this? Its work is to print whatever is written in it. That's why Python is very simple and easy to understand Now moving forward we will write a little bit in python And practice how to print the output in it Let's assume that I have to print my name first So I will write print Shraddha is my name In this way I can print the sentence also In the next line I can write my age is 23 So in this way you also print your name and print your age in the next line So let's save it and now run So my screen has been printed first as Shraddha's name and then my age is 23 Now we can print these two things in the same line Means if I want to print the same output in the same line above So I will copy this part What I will do is in the first line I will give comma here and after that I am going to write the second line So this will be my first line This will be my second line But here a twist is going to happen As soon as I will save it and run it What happened this time Earlier these two things were printed on different lines But this time both the sentences were printed on the same line So when we write print statement And in that comma Both things were printed on different lines but this time both sentences are printed on same line So when we write print statement and write multiple things by separating from this comma So it is printed on same line If I want to take it to next line then I have to use different print statements Now apart from this we can print numbers in python Why numbers? If I write here simply without double quotes and I save and run it. So in this case 23 will be printed on my screen. Similarly I can print 25 or 35. Let's do it again save and run. So this time for me both 23 and 35 will be printed. And along with this I can print numbers by doing plus and minus. That is if I want to print 35 plus 23 Then I can do this save and run So in the first line I have 23 printed, as it is In the second line I will get the sum of both which is 58 So in this way different sum, multiply, divide All these operations are also allowed in Python Now I have learnt how to print basic things in Python. Now let's talk about variables in Python. Like in programming variable is a name given to a memory location in a program. Now if I talk about math here. So we used to study a lot of things in math when we were small. Let's assume I have given a rectangle. Its one length is equal to A and the other side is equal to B. Now if I want to find the area of this rectangle, then what I used to do is, I used to do A multiplied by B. If I want to find its perimeter, then I used to do 2 into A plus B. On the other side, if I have given any square, then if there is one side A in the square, then I know that I will have A on the other side as well. And its area will be A multiplied by A. Now it is possible that this a square of any size, A can be of 5, A can be of 10, A can be of 50, A can be of 100. Similarly, as the questions of math were asked, the length and breadth of the rectangle used to change. According to that, I had a fixed formula in which I could change the values. So in math, this A, this B, this A, we call them variables. Variables means the one whose value changes. Variable means in English, which means to vary. Whose value can be changed. So as we used variables in math, we can use variables in programming also. Like if I write here, name is equal to Shraddha. So what I did is, I made a variable whose name is name And I have stored the value of Shraddha in it So this is the name of my variable And this is its value We always write variable is equal to my value Like I have written age is equal to 23 So I have my age variable And its value is 23 Now it is possible that after 1 year age. Now it is possible that the age will increase after 1 year, it is possible that it will obviously increase. So tomorrow if it is 24 instead of age 23, then what can I do? I can make changes in this age variable. After 2 years it has become 24 to 26, so changes will happen in this age variable and a new value will be stored here. Like I took price, so I can store a price store 25.99 in price. So this is my value and this price will become my variable. Whenever we write variables, variables means memory location. If I imagine, then my computer's memory will look like this, like our empty plots. Now, to store variables means you picked one plot from those empty plots and make a house on it. Like in computer we can visualize our memory in this way which has a lot of empty space. Now, as soon as I make a variable, let's assume I made a variable name in which value is stored, Shraddha. So, any random memory is saved in the computer, whose name I gave and I stored my value in it what value I stored? I stored the Shraddha value so this place in the memory was reserved it was fixed that this variable was stored here so that's why when I write a name in my Python program then the Python program will know that which name I am talking about name means that the value Shraddha is stored in it. So if I want to print my name now, then I can simply print it. If I print it and write the name in this way, then what will happen? The value of Shraddha will be printed on my screen for me. So if I change this name tomorrow and do something else, then next time I will print the name, then the new value will be printed. Similarly, if I will print the name, then the new value will be printed. Similarly, if I have declared the other variables, if I have written age is equal to 23, then it means that there is a random place in memory where the name of that place is and the value of 23 is stored in it. And in the same way, if I have written price is equal to 25.99, then it means that there is a random place in memory If I have written price is equal to 25.99 So there is a random place in memory Whose name is price And the value is stored in it by going to 25.99 So this way my variables are used in memory Now it may happen that I change the value of variable Means if I make age equal to 24 So what will happen Age variable will remain there But the value inside will be 23 and will be equal to 24 So next time when we will talk about age We will talk about this new value Which is stored in the variable named age Let's write the variables in code And see how they are used in the code So I have made my Python file Nothing is written in this file What I am going to do is define some variables Means as soon as I write name equal to and then I am going to write double quotes. I have written my name in double quotes. In the next line I will write age equal to then I wrote my age. In the next line I am going to write price is equal to 25.99. So in this way I have made a name variable by doing name is equal to Shraddha. In which value value stored. Age is equal to 23 and my variable is age. Price is equal to 25.99 and my variable is price. Here I have stored a string in it. What did I say? I called it a string. What is a string? A string is when you want to write a word or sentence or mix of words in a words if we want to write in the program, then we write it in double quotes. Now if you want, we can use single quotes or triple quotes, but usually by convention we will use double quotes. So the things we write in double quotes remain the same. So here I wrote Shraddha, so Shraddha will remain the same. If I think that no, I will remove Shraddha and remove these double quotes, then it will be wrong. This will be wrong according to the syntax of Python, that is, according to the rules of Python. That's why if you want to write a string, a word, a sentence, then you have to write it in double quotes. Similarly, 23 is a normal number, an integer number. 25.99 is a floating value, that means a decimal is added to it. We could have done 26.99 here,, 26.2, 25.00 also. So in this way I have defined multiple variables in my program. Now how to print these variables? Usually when we used to print, I used to say that we will write double quotes and name. So once we have written this code, we will run it. After running, what happened? name was printed on my screen. But I don't want to print the name, I wanted to print the Shraddha. Which was stored under the variable named name. So if we write anything by writing double quotes in print, Then it will be printed as it is. Here write name, here if I save by writing age, If I print, then I will have the age printed. But I want to print the value of age. So whenever I have to print the value, I remove these double quotes. And now if I write the age and run this code, then I have my age 23 printed. Similarly, if I run this by writing the name, then I have my name Shraddha printed. Similarly, if I save the price and run it, then my price is 25.99. So whenever I have to use the value of the variable, then I simply write the name of the variable. There I am not using double quotes, single quotes, quotes because quotes are used for strings. Now what we do is we print all these variables in the form of a sentence. Means I am going to print my name is Here I have put colon And after that I will write Comma, by doing comma I want to print Shadda on the same line So I will write name In the same way I will write on the next line My age Is Colon and again by doing comma I have printed age We will skip the price for now Let's save this once and now run After running it came in output My name is colon This part and sentence It is printed as it is After that I wrote comma and name So the value in name was printed In the same way in next line My age is printed as it is And after that age 23 was printed in the form of value. So in this way we can use our variables in our Python code. Now one more thing about variables. If I write A is equal to B in math, then it means A and B are equal. But this doesn't happen in Python. If I write age is equal to 23 in Python, it means I am trying to take value from right side to left side. Means value of 23 in right side is stored in age. Similarly if I write here age is equal to 25, then value of right side is stored in left side. So this is called assignment rule. This sign of equal to We call it assignment operator Assignment means to go to value and store So age is equal to 25 means 25 value goes to value and stored in the variable named age Now in python there is one thing that I write variable Is equal to something Apart from that if I make another variable age2 So in this I can assign a value of a variable means if I write age2 is equal to age so it means whatever value is in age now it will be stored in age2 so if I print age2 here we remove this statement and in first line I will just print age2 I did this run so 25 was printed in age2 this happened because 25 was stored in age, now I assigned the value of age2, so 25 came in age2 also, so when I printed age2, then I got 25 printed on the screen, now in python the names of the variables have some rules, so let's understand once, rules for identifiers. What are identifiers? Identifiers are our names. These can be the names of our variables. Variable name means, the name I have written here is equal to Shraddha. This name is the name of my variable and it is the value of that variable. Here I have written age is equal to 23. In that age is the name of my variable and 23 is its value. So all the names of the variables we write have some rules. In the name of our variable, uppercase, lowercase letters, digits, and underscores can also come. That means in the name of the variable, I can use any letter from A to Z, any letter from capital A to Z, any digit from 0 to 9, and I can also use an underscore. But in the name of the variable, I can't use percentage name of the variable, I can't use this type of symbols at the rate. The second rule says, like its example is that I gave my variable the name of my variable, this variable gave underscore 1, variable for print, all these are valid names. Apart from this, the identifier, identifier can also be the name of my variable, if we read the function further, then it can also be the name of my function. And in other places where I have to write the name of my variable also. If we read the function further, then it can be the name of my functions also. And in other places where I have to write the names of things, like the names of variables, there we follow these rules. Second is that whatever the identifier is, that is the name of the variable, it cannot start with digits. Means you write one variable like this or write variable one. This is valid but this thing is not valid because here in starting digit came, digit can come later but can never come in starting. So, like variable 1 is valid and 1 variable is not valid. Apart from this, there are special symbols like hash, at the rate, percentage, dollar sign, exclamation mark. We can't use these kind of symbols in identifier. And identifiers can be of any length. That means if I want, I can write a big kind of symbols in the identifier and identifiers can be of any length means if I want I can write a big name of my variable I can write my variable name as this is my python variable this big name will also be of my python variable there will be no error in python but because we are good programmers and whenever we write code it is not necessary that we write the correct code, It is also necessary that our code is so beautiful to see, it is so presentable and other people can understand it easily. That's why a good programmer, a good coder is recognized that the names of their variables are simple, short and meaningful. One is simple, this name is neither simple nor short, we don't even have to keep very complex names, like I don't know, like I don't know, like I don't know, now this is a valid variable name, but this is not a simple name at all. What will be a simple name? Like I give an age name to a variable, give a name name to a variable, give a count name to a variable, give a sum name to a variable. All these are simple and all these are short too. We don't have to give long names forcefully. And they are meaningful. Now by reading this name variable itself, we understand its meaning that it has a name stored in it. By reading age, we understand its meaning. It has age stored in it. By reading sum, we understand its meaning. It has sum stored in it. By reading count, we understand that it has sum stored in it. It is understood by reading count that it has count stored in it. So that's why all our identifier or the names of the variables have to be kept meaningful, short and simple to understand. Now apart from this, there is one more special thing about variables. Like here we have used many variables in the code. Here I used name, age, price. Now I am going to show you one thing by printing Now I am going to print something. I am going to print type. I will write type and name in it. I am going to print type in the next line. I will write age in it. I am going to print type in the next line. And I will write price in it. Now I had made a name variable. I am printing its type. I am printing the type of age. I am printing its type, printing the type of age, printing the type of price. You must be thinking that what is the meaning of type in the variables? So once it is printed, then also it will be understood. Here I have printed, in the first line type of name, what is the type of name? Class str, then printing type of age, in type of age it is saying class int. Then printing type of price, in typeofage it is saying class int then it is printing typeofprice, in typeofprice it is printing class float we read it as string, s-t-r-i-n-g, we read it as string, it is stry we read it as int, we read it as float what python does is, as soon as you you have written in a variable. For example, there is a string in this name. What can be a string? It can be a string word, sentence, paragraph. Basically, whatever we write in English becomes a part of our string. So it printed the type of the name that it is a string. Python automatically detected it. You didn't have to tell it separately. You have stored 25 in age, so Python has detected that the value in it is of the type int, that is, there is an integer value. If I would have done here minus 25 also, here if I do minus 25, save it and run it again, then also int will be printed. That is, integer value can be either minus, plus or zero. And this 25.99 is printed in the type floating value. Float means which contains decimals. So Python automatically detects the type of our value. And this type is called data type. That means the type of data, whatever type of data we have stored in the variable, it will have different types and according to that, Python many data types in python. In python we read primary data types of 5 types. One is we have integers, one is string, one is float, one is boolean and one is none. So we are going to read these primary data types in python. If I talk about integer then in python integer data type is there in which our positive values come, negative values come and 0 comes. These are all whole values, means minus 5.9 will not come in it but minus 5 will come. So 25 will come, minus 25 will come and 0 will come, these are all our valid integers. And for this type we have print and int, so we call it int type. for this type we have print and then int so we call it int type second type is string type in string type we can write any sentence or word like I have written my name so this is of string type if I have written hello so this is also of string type now we can write string in single quotes means in which we use this these are our single quotes we can use this in double quotes and we can write this in triple quotes and triple quotes also. Means if I want to write a string then I can print it in three ways. For example, if I want to write name is equal to or name1 is equal to sk. So I can write like this, if I want name2 is equal to. Here I can write sk this, if I want then name 2 is equal to, here with single quotes I can write sk, and if I want then with triple quotes, I can write sk like this, now we can print these three, I will print name 1, in next line I will print name 2, and in next line I will print name name 3 in the next line let's save and run so after running I got the same values of all 3 strings means I can represent my string in any way I can do it with single code or triple code but usually we will prefer to print all the strings with double code so in this way the second data type that we have is our string data type. Apart from this, we also have float data type. Decimal values come under float data type. Like I want to write 3.99 or 2.5 or 9.0. So, all these will be my floating values. And the fourth data type is the Boolean type. There can be only two values in Boolean. One value is true and one value is false. Like in math there are true and false, the same meaning is there in Python of Boolean values. Means true and false. Like if I have written age is equal to 23 and then I am writing old is equal to false. So this means that my age variable is of integer type, int type and my old variable is of boolean type. Because I have stored false values in it. This thing always have to be taken care that whenever we are writing true or false, In that T is capital T and F is capital F. If we write it small then this value will be wrong. So we are writing boolean values with capital F and capital T. And the fifth data type we is our NONE data type NONE basically represents where we don't want to store any value so if I write NONE in any random variable A so it means that A has no value yet and there is no value stored in it once we will make a Boolean variable and a NONE variable in the code I am going to take a simple variable, age is equal to 23 and in the next line I am going to write old is equal to false and in the next line a is equal to none. Now I am going to print type of old and in the next line I will print type of A. Let's save this. Now this type is also a function but we are not talking about functions right now. That's why I am not explaining this type much that how type and this old is printing its type. We will talk about it when we will be reading the chapter of functions. So as soon as I printed type of old, what is there in old? There is boolean value. So boolean value is printed here. And if A has none, then none type is printed for it. That there is no valid value in it. Now apart from this, if I had done small f instead of false, then in that case I would have got an error. If I write small t as true, then also error will come in that case. But if I write true with capital T, then error will not come. My code will run perfectly. But if I write true with capital T then there will be no error. My code will run properly. I can run it again and this time the same values will be printed. So this way our data types work in our Python language. Now let's talk about the keywords in Python. Keywords are some reserved words in Python. Like in English we have dictionary. There are some fixed words in dictionary which have fixed meaning. Now I know that if Apple is written there are some fixed words which have fixed meaning. Now I know that if there is an apple written in the dictionary then it will have a fixed meaning. By the way, there is a small dictionary of Python which has some reserved words which have been stored. In Python we have all these reserved words. Means and is our reserved word, as, assert, break. Here we will see that true is a reserved word for us, or none is a reserved word for us, or false is a reserved word for us, means this false, this none, this true, these are all keywords, there is one more meaning of keywords that you can't make keywords as identifier, means tomorrow you can't keep your variable name as lambda, tomorrow we can't keep our variable of our variable as lambda, we can't keep the name of our variable as return or true. These words can be used for the same meaning in Python, we can't use these words in Python for any other work. Means the work of true, false or none will remain the same for which Python has reserved them. Now here we will see many keywords together, but don't worry about how we will remember all of them. As we cover all the Python parts, we will cover all these keywords one by one. Like now we don't need to remember that false, none and true because we have read all three. So we already know the meaning of them and now we also know that these are all keywords. So we don't use their names like the name of the variable. Similarly, as we read more Python, we will remember all the names of the keywords so we don't have to remember it now, we will remember it with time now we have to keep one more thing in mind that Python is a case sensitive language there are many languages that are not case sensitive there are some languages that are case sensitive what does it mean to say case sensitive that in Python capital A and small a are different like SQL is structured query language if you will study a subject named DBMS in college or school then you will know that in DBMS SQL is not case sensitive language means in that you write capital A or small a everything is equal but python is not that kind of language in python if you write capital Apple in Python and small apple, then this is a different variable and this is a different variable. Both the variables are not the same. So here capital means what is upper case and what is small, what is lower case, both are different things. So that's why whenever we write keywords in Python, we have to remember that Python is case sensitive. That's why I told that whenever we write write true, the initial letter will remain capital. When we are writing false, the initial letter will be F capital. When we are writing none, the initial letter will be N capital. Otherwise, Python will give us an error. So that's why when we are printing output for the first time, when we are using data types for the first time, we have to remember that the things that I am getting written in the code should be the same in each letter otherwise we can get errors. Now next we are going to solve a small problem. What we have to do is print sum of two numbers in Python. That is, I have to write code for this. Now if I have to assign a value in two numbers and then print their sum, then what will be the logic for that? The logic will be that first I make two numbers. Let's assume my first number is A and my second number is B. I can store the value in A equal to 2. I can store the value in B equal to 5. So this is my first line and this is my second line. That I have two variables A and B which have value 2 and 5. Now if I want to store their sum, then first I can calculate their sum. So just like calculation is done in math, same calculation is done in Python. That means I can make their sum so as in math calculation is done same way in python calculation is done means I can make one more variable sum is equal to a plus b so directly what will python do first it will take a value of 2 and then b value of 5 both will add 7 and will store value in sum 7k equal and after that if I want to print sum then I can write print sum. So this will be my full program of 4 lines in which I have 2 variables a and b and I am calculating the sum of both of them and I am printing it. So let's write this once in Python code. This is my file in which I have made one variable a is equal to 2 and the second variable I have made b is equal to 5. I am making the third variable sum is equal to 2 and the other variable b is equal to 5. I am making the third variable sum is equal to a plus b and after that I am going to print my sum in the next line. Let's save this and now run. So I have 7 printed. So what did Python do? Directly 2 plus 5 i.e. we have stored 7 in the sum and we have printed the same thing. If I had 1000 here and I had 500 in b, then in that case I would have printed the same thing. Here if I had 1000 and in B I had 500, then in that case I would have printed a different sum. This time it has been printed as 1500, means 1000 plus 500 is equal to 1500. And here if I was not asked to calculate the sum, but the difference was asked that calculate A minus B, then I could have simply written here A minus B and after that I would have run it, then it would have been printed as So I would have printed 500. Means 1000-500 is equal to 500. So instead of sum I would have given the name of this variable difference. So here basically I have printed my difference which is equal to 500. So in this way if I have to write any basic code of python, then we can define the variables in this way. In this way we can perform some work in this way and we can print our output in this way. Now next we are going to talk about comments in Python. Comments are the part of our program that never executes. For example, if we have to write something in our code to explain our code, then we will write it in the form of comments. We generally start comments with our hash. By writing hash, we can write our single comments and by using triple quotes, we can write our multi-line comments. Let's see how comments work exactly. For example, I wrote print hello world on my screen. Now I know this line is a normal part of my code which will be executed Now if I write this line by copying it twice and if I put a hash in front of the second line Then what will happen? This will become a comment Comments are highlighted by Visual Studio Code in green color And now I am getting to know that this is a part which will not be executed If we run our code by saving it Then in the output we will have hello world will be printed only once. If we want, we can write any normal English in the comments. Like hi, I am a comment. Now if we want, we can write a multi line comment in our program. Like we can write multi line comment in this way in three lines or in two lines and if we comment out this, then one way is that we use two hash and the other way is that we can use triple quotes in this way. So this becomes a multi line comment which will not affect the execution of our code at all and again we will have the hello world printed. Now in visual studio code there is a shortcut to comment on lines. For example, I have a lot of print hello world and if I want to comment out these 3 lines, I can just press command and forward slash. Command and forward slash or control and forward slash in Windows, as we press, we can comment out multiple things at once and in the same way we can uncomment multiple things at once. So this is how comments work in our code. Now in Python we are going to talk about operators. What is an operator? An operator is a symbol which is used to perform some operation. In math we have seen this thing many times A plus B In A plus B, A and B are generally called operands And we call this plus as our plus operator Operator's job is to perform any operation Here plus performs the work of plus, here minus performs the work of plus, there we have minus also, minus performs the work of subtracting the other value from one value what does multiply do? it performs the work of multiplying two numbers so we have operators which we have seen in math also and the values on which operation is performed, we call them operands so an operator is a symbol which performs operations on the operands. Now we have operators of different types. Some of these operators we must have studied in Math in our childhood and some are new in programming which we study while doing programming. First of all let's talk about our arithmetic operators. Arithmetic operators are generally used to perform mathematical operations. First of all, we will talk about our arithmetic operators. For that, we will write the heading arithmetic operators. We create a number a, by which we assign a value of 5 and take another number b is equal to 2. Now, on a and b, we will perform our most basic arithmetic operations i.e. plus, minus, multiply and divide. We will perform them. To add two numbers in Python, we can write sum is equal to a plus b. This means by calculating a plus b, we are storing it under our sum variable and we can print this value. i.e. we can print our sum. Let's save it and execute. So we will get the value value print 5 plus 2 is equal to 7. If we want we can directly print it b that means directly we can print the sum of a plus b and execute it within our print function. As we have plus, similarly we have minus, similarly we have divide and multiply. So to do minus we can write a minus b, to multiply we can write A asterisk B. So this is the star symbol which is used for multiplication. For divide we use forward slash and this is A divided by B. So we save it and execute it. So we have A plus B is equal to 7, 5 plus 2 is equal to 7, 5 minus 2 is equal to 3, 5 multiplied by 2 is equal to 10 and 5 divided by 2 is equal to 2.5. Ok, here one more interesting thing is that whenever we divide a number by another number in Python, then the answer always comes in a floating value. Even though our answer could have been integer value but it will always come in the form of floating value. That means if here we had only one value of 5 instead of 5, then 4 divided by 2, we should have got the answer 2 but we will get the answer 2.0. If we re-execute it, then we will get the value of 2.0. Now these are the normal arithmetic operators which we have already studied in our math. Apart from these we have another operator which we call our modulo operator which we generally don't study in math. This is used to find out our remainder. That is, if we write a modulo, mod as our modulo operator which we generally don't study in math this is used to find out our remainder if we write A modulo we denote modulo with percentage sign A modulo B means if we divide A and B then we want to find out the remainder of both for example we have two numbers 5 and 2 when we divide 5 with 2 then we get the value equal to 1 in the remainder. So this 1 returns our modulo. If we execute after saving, then we will get the value equal to 1 in the answer. Just like we have a modulo, we have another operator which we call our power operator, that is if we write A double star B, then it means that we are trying to calculate A to the power B. A to the power B will be here, 5 to the power 2 which is equal to 25. In our answer also we will have the value returned which is equal to 25. So these were all our arithmetic operators. The next type of operators that we are going to study, we can call them our comparison or relational operators. The work of relational operators is to compare two values. We have generally seen them in math. Now if we want to compare two numbers in math, like if we want to check whether A is equal to B, then we write single equal to for that. But in Python, to check equality, we write double equal to A B, then we write single equal to for that. But in Python, to check equality, we write double equal to. In math, we write A not equal to B in this way, but in Python, we write exclamation equal to as not equal to. In fact, whenever we see exclamation in programming, it generally happens that we are trying to say not, that is, we are trying to negate anything. So this is our equal to operator and this is our not equal to operator. For example, let's take some new values and now let's talk about our relational operators. First of all, we can take our value a is equal to 50 and b is equal to 20. If we want to check whether a is equal to b, then we can simply print is a equal to equal to b. Whenever we are writing relational operators, it means that whatever expression is trying to say whether that value is true or false. That is relational operators will always return true or false in the output which is a Boolean value. This expression says A is equal to B i.e. 50 is equal to 20. So obviously the answer to this will be false. So let's save and execute it. So we will get the answer as false. Similarly if we write here A not equal to B. So the answer to that will come equal to true. That means 50 not equal to 20 is true or false. Its answer will always come true. Let's save it and we will get value equal to true in answer. In fact, let's comment out the part above once. Just like we have equal to and not equal to, similarly we have greater than, less than, greater than equal to and not equal to, similarly we have greater than, less than, greater than equal to and less than equal to. Just like here if we want to write whether A is greater than or equal to B, in that case we know that 50 is greater than or equal to 20, so in this case we will get print true. Or in fact if we want to print whether A is greater than or equal to B, this case also we will have value printed as true so let's execute, we have value printed as true and untrue just like we have done greater than, similarly we can do less than also so here A less than or equal to B and A less than B in this case we will have answer as false and in this case also we will have answer as false so let's save and execute. At last we will have two false prints. Now the relational operators we don't need to remember them as such. We can just put an eye on it. Relational operators will have conditional statements later. It is a very important topic which when we will read it we will use it many times and we will remember it by ourselves. After relational operators the next type of operators which we are going to study are our assignment operators. And we have already studied one assignment operator. Whenever we write a is equal to something, that is, if we write a is equal to 50, then we call this equal to our assignment operator. This is our equal to assignment operator. The work of assignment operators is to assign a value. So when we are writing A equal to 50, it means that we are assigning this 50 value to this variable A. This is our assignment operator but apart from this we also have many assignment operators. For example, we have a number num. We are initializing num with 10. If we want to add 10 to our number, then we a number num. We are initializing num with 10. If we want to add 10 to the number we have, then we will have a value of number plus 10. What will be number plus 10? 10 plus 10, which is going to be equal to 20. So, we will have 20 in the value of this num variable and we can print this 20 if we want. Let's save it and execute it. So, we will have a and if we want to print this 20 then we can also print it. So we will save it and execute it and we will get the value of 20. Here we can write the value of num.save and this num is going to be equal to 20. Let's do the above values, comment out. So here the statement 10 num is equal to num plus 10. This is the way to write it in short. num plus equal to 10. That means we have a special assignment operator in python which works to add any new value in that number. This statement and this statement both have the same meaning. So if we remove this statement from here, then also we will have 20 returns in output. So we have plus equal to operator which works to add a new value in that number. As we have plus equal to, similarly we have minus equal to also. So this means that value of num will return to us equal to 0. 10 minus 10 execute and answer will be 0. Similarly, we have multiply equal to multiply equal to will multiply 10 with 10 value. If we write 5 here, then it will multiply 10 with 5. In answer, we will get 50. Save and execute and answer will be 50. Similarly, we have divide equal to. When we divide 10 with 5 answer we get 50. And similarly we have divide equal to. When we divide 10 by 5, in answer we get 2. So the answer is going to be 2. Similarly we can calculate modulo also. That is our remainder. When we divide 10 by 5, in remainder we get 0 value. In answer num will be equal to 0. And similarly we have power operator. What will power do? 10 to the power 5, 10 to the power 5 will be equal to 1 lakh. So in answer we are going to get the same value. Save, refresh so we have 1 lakh. So in this way we use different assignment operators. Now as we have assignment operators, next type of operator which we will discuss is our assignment operators. Now, as we have assignment operators, the next type of operator we will discuss are our logical operators. Logical operators work on Boolean values. We have 3 logical operators in Python NOT, AND and OR. All three are very simple and in fact, their meaning is also very simple. Let's start with not operator. If we take any boolean value, then not operator returns us its opposite. If we write true in Python, then if we write not operator in front of it, then we will get value return equal to false and vice versa. Like this part we will comment out and next we will discuss our logical operators. In logical operators if we want to print not of false then we will have true return and if we want to print not of true then we will have false return. So we will execute it. So what is not of false? Not of false is true. And what is not of true? Not of true is false. Means whatever boolean value we had written, opposite of that. In fact, we can use any expression here. For example, we have a value of 50 equal to and b value is equal to 30. So if I want to write a greater than b, then what will be that value? 50 greater than 30 means true value. So here if we write a greater than b, then what will be that value? 50 greater than 30, that means true value. So here if we write a greater than b and add it in a parenthesis, then a greater than b will be true and the not of this will be false equal. Let's re-execute this. We had true value, next we got false value. That means the expression, single expression is returning returning boolean value, opposite answer of that is not returned. Just like we have not, we have next operator which we call and operator. And operator works on two values. Let's suppose we have two values, value 1 is equal to true and value 2 is equal to true. So we can print the answer of our AND operator in which we will write value 1 and value 2. So our NOT operator works on single operator whereas AND and OR operator work on our two values. Basically, to say value 1 and value 2 means that we are trying to evaluate value 1 and the value 2 in Hindi. AND operator gives true answer only when both the values are true. AND operator says that I will say true only when value 1 and value 2 are both true. So, we save it and execute it. So instead of answer operator, we have the answer of and operator. We got the answer as true or equal. So now value 1 and value 2 are both true. But if we had false here, then in that case, the answer would have been returned as false or equal. So whenever we use and operator, its answer comes true when both values are true. Just like we have AND operator, we have OR operator. OR operator means in Hindi, Ya. That means one value or another value. If any of the two is true, then I will say true. Let's write OR operator here. This is our OR operator and this is our AND operator AND operator is giving us false and OR operator is giving us true OR operator if one of the two values is true then true returns but if both the values are false then it will return false and here also if we write false then we will get return value equal to false so in this way our AND, OR and NOT, all three logical operators work. If we want, we can directly evaluate logical operators on the expressions also. For example, in our expression, we can write the expression for A is equal to 50 and B is equal to 30. Is A equal to B? So obviously this expression will return us false. And in the second expression we can check, is A greater than B? So A greater than B will give us the truth. So in this case our overall answer will be true. I hope we are able to understand that A equal to B will give us false because false because 50 is not equal to 30 but it is greater than 50. So this expression will give us true. So the answer of false and true is finally true because if any value of both is true then it returns true. If we execute then we will get the value of true equal in the answer. So in this way we can combine multiple operators and create a little logic. Here we have combined logical operator but we have also used equal to which is our comparison operator. So, these are our majority 4 operators. Apart from this we also have many operators but most frequently in Python these are the 4 operators which we are using. Now, next we are going to talk about type conversion. Type conversion is when we are converting one type of variable into another type of variable. That means if the type of my variable is integer but if I want to convert this integer into floating value then for that we use type conversion. We have 2 types of conversions in Python. One conversion is called type conversion. And another conversion is called type casting. Both have some differences. Python's interpreter automatically does type conversion for us. That means we don't have to tell it separately that convert this type to this type. Python will automatically do type conversion for us. And what is casting? Casting is forced, that means the type we convert manually. So whenever casting is happening, we have to manually tell Python as a programmer that we want to convert this type 1 variable into type 2 variable. We are going to read both of them now, so there is no need to get confused by this name. First of all, we read type conversion which is automatic conversion. For example, let's come here. For type conversion, for example, we have a variable 2 and another variable is 4.25. Now if I want to print the sum of both, then here we can make a variable sum is equal to a plus b. Now I know that one of these variables is a, its type is integer int and b's type is float. But what will python do when we are adding an int value from a float value, doing anything in any expression, performing any arithmetic operation, then Python will automatically convert this integer into a float. Because float is superior to integer, more data can be stored in float, decimal values are there in float, point something shows extra information. One is 2, one is 2.153. So this is extra information. So this is a more superior value. We generally call float as superior as compared to int. So here, Python will convert int into superior value. So when expression will be evaluated, it will mean that here it is being calculated 2.0 plus 4.25 and its answer is going to be 6.25. So when we print this sum, Python automatically will have done type conversion for us, which is implicit conversion. If we execute it, then we will get 6.25 in the answer. There is no error. But here in this expression, this A, we could have stored a string inside it. Now we know 2, in this string there is a number 2, but what is this? How will Python interpret this? This type is of type string. Here if I try to print type of variable A, this is going to be of type string and string is not allowed to be added to floating value. So when we are writing a plus b, then we will get an error. What will be the error? Python will give us an error, that is, it is trying to say by giving an error in this thing that it can only concatenate string, not float to string. That is, it is saying that you can add string to string. We are trying to add string to float which is wrong as python is saying. This is not possible. So python did not do type conversion for us in this case. But we could have converted this string into an integer forcefully. And we call that manual conversion type casting. Now how do we do type casting? to do type casting we use some functions in python like if we want to type cast any value in int then we will write int parenthesis and then we will pass our value in it so whatever value is there it will convert in integer similarly if we want to convert any value into float, then we will write our value as float and pass it in it. So whatever the output answer will be, we will have a floating value. So here to typecast the string, we can write int and this 2 will be typecast into integer value. Let's save it and now we will not get any error. Now if we print one thing which will be typeofA. If we print typeofA then this time we will get int printed. Let's save it. And this is going to be int and 6.25. If we wanted we could have done float here also. So what would have happened? It would have converted to floating value. If we run it again, this time its class is float equal and 6.25 we have got the same answer. So whenever this type of value is there, we can type cast it and convert it to a correct value. Obviously if we write our name here and try to convert it to float by type casting then it will not be possible in this case we will get an error because Shraddha or any string with characters cannot be converted into floating value type casting works only when there is data in another type which fits in our new type when there is a valid number here then then only type casting will work. In other cases, type casting will not work. So we frequently use type casting in Python to convert from one data type to second data type. If we want, we can type cast in string also. If we have a value a is equal to or let's take a number 3.14. Now if I want to convert this into a string, then we can write a is equal to string str of a and now we can print type of a. Let's save it, run it and now we will have a type of a, string equal. Now this is not a number, we have an explicit string, which we have printed. So till now we have learnt in python, how variables and data types work, how operators work, how we can print output. So the next thing we are going to cover is, we have input in python. That is how we can take input from the user. The basic meaning of taking input from the user is that if we have written any program, for example, there is a variable in that program whose value we do not have already, its value will come to us when that program is executing, that is, it will be running. And according to that, we will be doing all our calculations, so how to take that input? To take input in python, we use our input statement which is used to accept values from the keyboard using the keyboard from the user. For example to take input we can write input and we write input in the same way as we write our print statement and we can also print something in input input like we can write here enter your name and in this way we save it and when we execute this code then we will get the same statement printed on the screen that is we will get the same statement printed enter your name but after that our execution will not end means our program is still running and if we want then there is a new value which we can write here on our terminal window I am going to write my name here Shraddha Khapra, for example I wrote this name here and as soon as I press enter, my program will end How did the program end, how did I know, when I will have my folder name printed again, that is this value I have passed as an input to my program. Now if we want then this value which I have passed by writing above the terminal we can store it in any variable. Like we can create a name name variable and later we can print the value of this name also. For example I write you or here we can write welcome and then our name. Let's save it and re-execute. After rerunning what we have to do now is enter your name. So here I am going to enter Shraddha. As soon as I enter it has been printed to me welcome Shraddha. How did this come printed? I will enter this, I have printed welcome Shraddha, how it has been printed, from the input, I have given any value as input, so what will python do, it will store it in the variable name, after that when we print welcome name, then our name will be printed, if we want we can pass any number, if we want we can pass any other value, like here we can write enter your age, something like this and let's save it and here you entered, save and re execute, here we can enter age, let's suppose I write 45, entered so we got you entered 45, so the same value will be reverted back and echoed back to us. Now one special thing, whenever we use the input statement in Python, our result of the input statement is always a string. That means here, let's suppose, we want to enter some value and then what we will do is we will print the type of that value, here I am going to print type of value and then we are going to print our value, we will save it and let's refresh or in fact let's rerun, so in the beginning we will print a value value let's suppose we write our college so it entered and printed our college is a string and it printed that string now next time we will execute that code and this time we are going to enter some integer value I entered 25 but 25 is also a value its type is is string type. In fact, if we enter a decimal value here, 99.99, then also we will get its type as string. Because whenever input gets any value entered, then even if it is a number, instead of taking it as a number, what does input do? It converts it into a string. So integer will be converted in this way, if we talk about floating value, then floating value will be converted in this way, if we talk about floating value then floating value will be converted in this way, so all the things will be converted in string, so that's why if we want to take an integer value as input, if we want to take an input of floating value or any other value, then to convert it in their appropriate data type, we have to use type casting, that is whatever value is coming to us from this input, if we are expecting that value to be an integer value, then we will surround the input with this integer, that is, as we normally write, for example, as we can write int of 5, similarly now instead of this, what we have to write is, we have to write the complete input and enter some value. So whatever value we get, now we will typecast it in an integer value. This time if we run our code by saving, then we can enter the value 25, so this time we got the type of 25 as integer. The way we did int, we can do float, save and rerun. So this time if we enter 25 then we will get the value float and it will be printed 25.0. So in this way we can take any value in python as input. For example here let's suppose we want to take our name, age and our marks take input of our marks so first of all we make a variable named so inside this we can take input of our name enter name like this after that we can enter our age input enter age then we can enter our marks input enter marks and then we can print, let's suppose we write welcome and then our name, not Shrad we can print our marks. Let's do this save and execute. We can enter our name in name, we can enter our age in age and we can enter our marks in marks. So now we have this 24 and 94.4, these are string values but we can convert them to integer at the time of input and we can convert marks to floating values. Save and re-execute as such no change will come but in this way we are generally writing our proper programs in which in the beginning we are inputting some value in the beginning then we may be performing some operations on that value and then finally we print some output in our program. So all the basics of python that is the introduction of python or any language in which our input output comes, variables come, data types come, basic operations come, all those things we have covered in our chapter 1. And now finally we are going to move towards solving some practice questions. Now this is our first practice question. Whenever we are solving practice questions, first of all we have to try to see the question, understand it, you can read the question with me. After that, we have to pause the lecture and try to solve the question ourselves. If the question is solved by us, then we can come and tally our answer with our solution and if it is not solved then no problem we have to try to solve the question by ourselves and then we can come and see our explanation first question is write a program to input two numbers and print their sum means first of all we will input two numbers and print their sum. First of all we will input two numbers so from the input statement we are going to input first our first number and after that our second number. And then finally we have to print their sum. That is our first number, we will add our second number to it. This is different from our earlier question in that this time we have to input our numbers rather than defining two variables. that this time we have to input our numbers rather than defining two variables. First of all we have to input our first number. So here we write enter first. Or in fact we write enter first. And we make our variable with first name in which our value will be stored. Similarly we write second. So here we write second, so we will enter second here. And while taking input, what will be these values? They will be string, so we have to convert them into int. Let's convert it to int and we will convert it to some integer value. To print their sum, we will write print sum equal to first plus second. Let's save and run, so first of all we have to enter first, in first we enter number 20, in second we enter number 50 and answer will be we have sum is equal to 70, so in this way our small program is done which we have built, generally we have first and second, as it is possible that you may not want to give big variable names, then we can also call them a and b, x and y. Next let's come to the practice question. Next question is, write a program to input side of a square and print its area. That means if we have any square, then we know that all the sides of the square are equal. So what we have to do is, we will take the side as input and the area of the square is side multiplied by side equal. We have to print this area. We can take the side as integer or floating value. Let's take it as a floating value. To write our code, we can call our variable side and enter square side. We convert it, type cast it to float and then if we want to print the area then we can print area equal to side multiplied by side which is side square let's save it and let's run it first of all we have to enter our side so let's suppose our square side is equal to 4 so square of 4 will be 16 printed so the area of the square is equal to 4, then square of 4 will be 16 printed, so the area of the square is equal to 16. If we wanted we could have done double asterisk, i.e. side to the power 2, so that too would return the same output. Let's execute, if the side of square becomes 10 this time, then the area of square will be equal to 100. We have got 100. Next question, we are asked to write a program to input two floating point numbers and print their average. Means we have to take two float numbers, one can be floating number A and one can be number B. What will be the average of both? The average of any two numbers is A plus B divided by 2K equal. So we have to print this average value. So to print this, will write here enter first so we will get our first number let's call it A and we have already type cast it to floating value and second number will come to us let's call it B and then the average of both the numbers that is going to be a plus b divided by 2. This will be our average. Let's run this. Let's take the first number as 16.5 and let's take the second number as 3.5. 16.5 plus 3.5, both the summation will be equal to 20, 20 divided by 2 will be 10. So the average of both the numbers will be 10. As soon as we print the average, we will get the value 10.0. So in this way we have completed our code. Next program which we will write is, Write a program to input two integer numbers a and b. Print true if a is greater than or equal to b. That means if a is greater than or equal to b, then in that case we should have true print and if not then we should have false print. So simply we can do is we can input two integer numbers and our expression a greater than or equal to b, we will simply print it in our print statement. So if this expression is true then we will have true print, if expression is not true then we will have false print. So first of all let's take our two numbers as input and type cast them to integer values and in our expression we simply to simply print a greater than equal to b, save it and execute it, our first number is let's suppose 15 second number is 2, now we know 15 is greater than equal to 2 so in that case we have true, but if we take opposite first number is 2, a is equal to 2 and b is equal to 15, in that case we got true and if we take opposite that is first number we take 2, a is equal to 2 and b is equal to 15 in that case we got false return. So in this way we have covered our practice questions and I hope that our lecture 1 in python would have taught us a lot of things about the basics of python. So here our chapter 1 finish up, the slides of chapter you will get in the description box below You can download them By hope in today's lecture we have learnt a lot about python And definitely in upcoming lectures we will learn a lot about python So that's all for today See you in the next lecture Till then keep learning and keep exploring.

 # Lecture 2
  Hi everyone and welcome to the complete Python language series in which today we are going to read our chapter 2 In chapter 2 we will cover what are the strings in Python and how do strings work and some related functions and also we will cover one more important concept which are conditional statements which form the core So let's start with our chapter 2. Hi everyone, so let's start with chapter 2. In which we are going to read about strings first. Now strings is a data type, we have already read this in our first lecture and it stores a sequence of characters. That is, we store a sequence of different characters in the form of a string. It can be a single character, it can be a word, it can be a complete sentence or a paragraph. We saw three ways to create a paragraph. To create a string, we have seen three ways. For example, here in this code, we have already made a file in our folder with the name lecture underscore 2 dot py. So in this python file, we will be writing our lecture 2 codes. If I want to create a string in it, then in this way we can make a variable named string 1. In double quotes, we define our string, this is a string. So what is this string? This is a sentence which we have stored in the form of a string. We can create strings in this way also. In fact we can create strings in single quotes also. If we want we can make a string two in which we can store a single word enclosed within single quotes. the same thing we can do in triple quotes also. We can have a string 3 which we can store in triple quotes this is a string in this way. Now these three are the valid ways to create a string in python but when we are creating our string most of the time we will use double quotes because generally when we see other people's code in Python, then double quotes are used in it or in fact in other programming languages too. Here we may have a question in our mind that why do we need three different types of quotes to create strings? It is generally due to the fact for example we have to use apostrophe somewhere. That means we have to use single quote in our string. So how do we use it? For example, we have to write this is Apna College's Tutorial. Now if we enclose this string in single quotes, then Python will get confused. How will it get confused? Because single quote means the string is starting from here. And as soon as we see the other single quote, it means the string is ended here. So, this word which is left and a single single quote is left, our Python interpreter will not understand its sense. So, instead, the string in which we want to use single apostrophe, we will enclose it in double quotes, so this way a valid string will be made and we have enclosed the apostrophe, that is the single quote in it. But here if we had double quotes, then what we would have done is we would have enclosed this string in single quotes. So, in this way we have different different quotes available, different ways available so that we can use single quotes and double quotes inside the string value itself. Okay, these are very basic things, now let's talk about some other things. For example, we have to write 2-3 sentences inside a string. Like, this is a string, we are creating it in Python. We want to write 2 sentences like this. But we want that as soon as we print one sentence, our second sentence should be printed in the next line. But in this way, if we try to give the next line in our code editor, then we get an error. Because this next line is not valid in Python. So as such, generally the way we work in word documents, we cannot work in code. If we have to give the next line in in any string then for that we use escape sequence characters. What are these escape sequence characters? Let me also write it down. Escape sequence characters are some special characters whose work is to give formatting. Formatting means if let's suppose we want space of tab or we want next line then we can't directly code things like this. So to do those things we use these characters. Now if we want to print this string normally, let me try to print my string 1, so on our screen our string 1 will be printed like this and I want next line to come here. So for that what we can do that we can write backslash n backslash n is an escape sequence character which means next line whenever a string is printed or there is an operation with it then we should have the next line so we save it and run it so what will happen is that a next line will come here this extra space was created in the starting because we had extra space before v, we can rerun it and in this way we can bring the next line inside our string. As we brought the next line, we could have brought the space of tab also. If we write backslash t here, it means this is the tab escape sequence character. Let's save it and rerun. So in this way, a space of tab came between our two sentences. So we can use escape sequence characters at different times whenever we are writing a paragraph or a big line in strings. Now let's talk about how we can perform different operations on strings. The first operation we will talk about is concatenation. Now concatenation sounds like a very difficult word but it is actually a very easy thing. Like in math we can add two numbers, we can simply write a plus b. Similarly in python we can add two strings. Like if we add one string 1 and one string 2, then their output will be a valid output in python and the operation of adding two strings is called concatenation. And to add two strings in python and to connect those strings operation is called concatenation and to connect those strings we can use our plus operator in python. Like here if I create my string 1 let's call it apna and my string 2 let's call it college so we can simply write string 1 plus string 2. If we save it and run it, so we will get the output of both the strings concatenated version, means the connected version, if we want we can store the connected version in a different string also, let's call it final string, and we will store our final string here, save and run, so we have our final string, next the operation we can perform is of length, if we want we can find out the length of any string using this length function, now we don't need to take tension about functions at all, we will read functions in detail later, so now it may be that we may hear the function word again and again, so we have to imagine the function as a magical word, which we write, then a particular operation is performed for us, like as we write plus, then it adds two things, similarly, there are different functions in Python, which are inbuilt, which are used to perform different tasks. In Python, we have a length function which is used to calculate the length of a string. So we can simply write len as we write print and then our parenthesis and in that whatever string we pass, whatever string we write, we will get its length. For example, here I want to print the length of string 1. So we can simply print len of str1. Or we can store it in a different variable. Here we have made a variable named len1 and we are storing length of string 1. And then we are printing len1. Similarly, we can the length1. Similarly, we can print the length2 as well. Let's create another variable length2, in which the length of string 2 will be there. and let's print this as well. Let's run it. So first of all, we have 4 printed because there are 4 characters in our string. And after that we have 7 printed because there are 7 characters in the college. When we are creating our final string so let's suppose we create our final string in such a way that we add a space and additional in between so in this way adding a new string i.e. empty string is also completely valid i.e. first our string will come then a space will come then college will come in this way in the final string we will have an extra space in between and then if we want we space in the middle of the final string and then we can print the length of the final string. We can print length of our final string. Let's save it and run it. So we have our college printed with a space and total characters printed 12 characters. The two of the initial college and College, were 11 characters. So basically whenever a string's length is calculated, then this empty space is also counted. So never ignore spaces while counting length, we have to remember this. Because many times as a beginner we make this mistake that we think only characters will be counted in length. Spaces are also counted in length, special characters like percentage, dollar sign, add rate, in fact digits are also counted. Now in Python, another interesting thing related to strings is called indexing. Indexing is something that we get to see in different languages in programming. If you have read C language, C++, Java, JavaScript other language of this type, then I am sure you already know about indexing, otherwise we learn in Python. Basically, indexing means that whenever a string is created in Python, then internally all the characters of that string get an index. Index is kind of saying that character gets its position number. Like we used to stand in the assembly of the school, first student used to stand, then second student used to stand, then third student used to stand. Similarly whenever our string is created, we can imagine that from here, from the first character, our numbering starts, our count starts, we get to know our position. And in Python, the numbering of strings always starts with 0 instead of 1. So the first character gets index 0, second character gets index 1, third character gets index 2 and so on. And even if there are spaces or there is an underscore or a special character, it also gets index. Now how does index help us? Index helps us to access characters. Access characters means if we want to get the character of position 2, then we can directly access it. How? We can write the name of our string, then we put square brackets. In square brackets, we can write the index of which we need the character. For example, we need the character of index 2, then we can simply the index in which we want the character. For example we want the index 2 character, so we can simply write this and access our character. Let's check this thing once. In our code, let's create a string, let's call it our college, in which we have given a space. Now if I want to access the index 0 character in this, So we can call this character or ch is equal to str of 0. This means that we are accessing the 0th index character in the string and if we want we can print it also, we save it, run it and we have A printed. In the same way if we do 1 then we will have P printed, if we do 2 then we will have N printed, if we do 2 then we will get N printed, something like this, if we want we can directly access it, we can directly write string of let's suppose 3, so 0, 1, 2, 3, we should get A printed, like this, if we go to 4 we can also get our space printed, so this time the output we will get will be an empty space, so this time the output we will get will be an empty space. So in this way we have accessed the characters in the form of index, but we cannot change our characters with the help of index. That means if we want that my string of 4, this empty space, this empty space to be replaced with a dash or with an at the rate sign, then that thing will not be possible to do. If we write some code of this type and try to run it once then we will get an error. What is the error? String object does not support item assignment. Assignment means that the particular index on which we are trying to assign a different character value this is not allowed in Python. So in the form of index, we can only access characters, we cannot manipulate them, that means we cannot modify them. So this was all about indexing. There is one more special thing related to strings, which if you want to learn machine learning after learning Python, then there is a concept called slicing in Python, which we are using a lot. Because while applying machine learning algorithms we have to deal with data a lot and we have to find out relevant information from data. So, at that time we will use slicing a lot. So, that's why slicing is an important topic whenever we are reading python. What does slicing mean inside python? Slicing means accessing parts of a string. For example, if we have a fruit like apple, we cut it and call it slicing an apple. Similarly, to break strings in parts, we call it slicing. Now we can directly cut strings in Python. We can simply write the name of our string and then in square brackets we pass two indexes. One is our starting index and one is our ending index. If we have this string in which we have passed any starting index or any ending index, then the entire slice of the middle of it will be returned to us. So for slicing we write starting index colon ending index and in this our starting index is always included but our ending index is not included. For example if we have made a string in our college and if we want to access any part in it then if we have written 1 colon 4 then it will mean from index 1 to index 2, 3. All the string parts till index 3 will return back to back. So we have PNA, this string part will be returned back. Let's check this. Let's suppose I have this string and from here we try to take index from 1 to 4 save and run so we will get PNA, how did we get PNA? A is our index number 0 so we want to start from 1 so we will start from P 2 will get N and 3 will get A and we will stop at 3 because we never include 4 similarly we need one more space so we will do 5 so this time we will get PNA with an additional space. If we want, we can start this count from 0. If we do from 0 to 4, then we will get the first word, save it, refresh it, we got our and if we only want college, then what will we have to do for that, which index will we start from? 0, 1, 2, 3, 4. We will start from the 5th index for college, from index no. 5 and which index we have to go to, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, so we will write our 12, for 11th index we have to do count plus 1, so we will have the whole college printed. Ok, instead of 12 we could have written one more thing here which would be length of string. This would have been completely valid too because what is going to happen in the last thing? The last index will have plus 1, the length of our string. So we could have written length of string also, even then what would we have? The same output would have been returned. So whenever we have to give the last index, we have to go to the last index, then we can simply write length of string also. One more thing about slicing is that whenever we miss our second ending index, we have to go to the last index, then simply we can also write length of string. One more thing about slicing that whenever we miss our second ending index, then python automatically understands that we want to go to the last index. That means even if we run our program by writing only this much, then also we can reach the college. That means if we ever have to go to the last index, then we can completely skip the last index from here. And let's suppose if we write any index here and miss the starting one, then Python will automatically understand that 0 should have been here. So writing this line means that we want to go from 0 to 4. Similarly, if we write here, it means that we want to go from 5 to length of string. So sometimes in Python, if we find the starting index missing or ending index missing, then Python automatically fills it. Let's save it and try to run it. So in the first case, we have our print which goes from 0 to 4. In the second case, we have the college print is going from 5 to length of the string. Now generally in normal cases slicing works like this only. But there is one more special case of slicing in which we have negative index. Now what is the concept of negative index? In Python when we go from start to end, we increase the count of our positive index. For example, we have this string called apple, in this the initial index will be 0, then 1, then 2, then 3, then 4. But in Python there is one more special feature which is not seen in other languages. If you are coming from C++, Java background or JavaScript, then generally we will not see this in programming. That we can count our index backward also. How backward counting works? Backward counting starts with minus 1 and then we go by decreasing our number with minus 1. That means last index is called minus 1, second last is called minus 2, third last is called minus 3 and so on. So in this way if we try to slice like this, string of, it means that we are trying to go from this index to this index. And in this also our ending index will not be included. Meaning if we are trying to go from, then we will only get P and L printed. We can test this also and when we create apple then we can try to print string of minus 3 to minus 1. Let's save this and let's run it. So we will get print p and l. Similarly if we want to print from starting then we can write minus 5 from minus 5. If we want to print only this much then we will write minus 2 minus 2, save, rerun, then we will get the app printed. Meaning to go from minus 5 to minus 2 means we will cover these three characters and we will skip the last one. So, backwards counting also helps us in some cases when we do not have the exact idea of the length of the string and when we want to count our characters from the last. Although now because we are in the beginner stage, so we will not be seeing its practical cases as such. We just have to remember that this is how the concept works. Now when we are studying strings, then we are studying a lot of concepts together. Now we will study a few more functions in strings which are very useful. But as a professional programmer, sometimes we have to work with different languages together or we have many different concepts which we use together whenever we are coding in the company. So it is not necessary that all these functions are remembered together or we will remember them lifelong if we read them once. As a programmer, when you start coding in multiple languages, start learning multiple technologies, which generally all of us would be doing, whatever software engineering, machine learning, data science field, so at that time, it is not necessary that we remember all these functions. So as a programmer, many times it will happen with us that we will not remember the names of small functions, so in such cases, if we simply want to google things, then that is also completely normal. That is, if we are writing a big code in Python and if we simply want to google things, then that is also completely normal. If we are writing a big code in Python and we forget what specific function works in Python or how the slicing of negative indexing works, then we can simply google it while doing our work. A lot of practical coding is not about memorizing things, it is about understanding things from a logical point of view. it is not about memorizing things, it is about understanding things from a logical point of view. We should understand the background of how things are working logically, we don't necessarily have to memorize things, we don't have to do their work, but yes, there will be some basic syntaxes that we have to remember along with it. And it would be better than remembering that we practice things, that is, you will be writing code along with the tutorial, with the class, so we will automatically remember maximum things. That means you will be writing code with tutorial and class. So things are maximum things. You will automatically remember them. Now in next strings we will talk about functions. As we saw our length function in string, similarly we have many more functions. The first function which we will be studying is ends with function. If we write any string and write.ends with and if we pass any value in parentheses, then this function will check if our string ends with this string. This is called sub string, sub string means any small string. This function checks for us if the last part of our string is ending with this sub string. If it is ending, then we will get a return true and if it is not ending then we will get the return false. For example, let's take a string, string is equal to I am studying python from my college, in this way if we write any string, now if we want to print str.endsWith, so here we can print string.endsWith, sometimes for our help visual studio code automatically suggest us some functions which we can use, as soon as we want to use this suggestion we can simply press enter and then we will put our parenthesis whenever we write any function to use it later we have to put parenthesis always. We will read about other functions in detail later. Here if I want to check that my string is EGE, does it end with this or not, then for that we can pass EGE, we save it and run it, then we will get print true. But if I have to check that does it end with APP, then obviously my string does not have APP in the last, if we execute it then we will get false. So in this way any word, any string ends with any particular substring, for that we can check using this function. Second function which we can use which may be handy later, this is capitalized function. Capitalizing means that we can check using this function. Second function which we can use which can be handy later is capitalized function. Capitalize means to capitalize the first character of our string. For example if I make it small i and here we write string.capitalize. Only this much, so what will this function do? Whenever it prints our new string, then i will be capitalized. One more thing, if we want to print our string for the second time, like this, then our capitalized works only once, it doesn't change in the second time, i doesn't change in the original string. Whenever string.capitalize is working, it is creating a new string which will have changes. There will be no changes in the old string. But we want that there are changes in our old string too. So for that we can simply write string.capitalize is equal to string. That means we are storing this storing it in our old variable. So this time when we print our string, changes will happen in it. Now we are trying to modify our original string. As soon as we print, now modifications have been made in the original string. So whenever any function is working in the string in this way, it does not make changes in the original string, it makes a new string and changes in it. The next function that we can use is the replace function. The work of replace function is to replace an old value with a new value. For example, we have a string, I am studying Python from my college. All the o's in this string i.e. from, college, python we want to replace all these o's with a. So for that we can simply write string.replace we will first pass old value i.e. I have to replace o with a. So from this string wherever o will come it will be replaced with a. Let's try to run it. I am studying, in python instead of o it is a, in from instead of o it is a and in our college instead of o it is a. If we want we can replace the whole substring also. For example if we want to do javascript instead of python then we can write python our old value and javascript our new value, save and run and we have come to I am studying javascript from my college. Next let's talk about our find function, find function works to search for this word in our string, find function search whether this word exists in our string or not and if this word exists then wherever it exists first time, its starting index returns to us. That means whatever is the first occurrence, its first index returns to us. For example, we want to search for O in our string. So where does O come first in the string? O comes first time in Python here. So its index after returning. Let's try to do it. str.find We are trying to search for character O. Let's save it. And search. So we got the character index which is equal to 18. You can also count it if you want. But I'm pretty sure that Python program is returning us the right thing. If we want, we can search the whole world also. Like here if I write I am from studying python from then we can search for from and wherever from exists for the first time that is on our index number 5, its index has been returned to us. 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 means our word starts with the 5th index. If we are searching for something which doesn't exist like for example I search for the letter Q then in that case we will get return of minus 1. Minus 1 is getting return because minus 1 as such is not a valid index. Whenever we talk about indexes we should never think about negative indexes in first thought. Negative indexes exist only for slicing. When we deal with normal strings, indexes start from zero and keep on increasing positively. Next, let's talk about another function. This is our count function. Count function counts occurrences for a substring and a string. That means if we pass any word, then how many times does the word exist in our string, its count comes to us as a return. Like in this string if we write string.count and pass from, then how many times from exists in my string, it exists twice, once here, once here, so we will get 2 printed, so we have 2. If we want to count how many times letter O exists, so it exists 4 times, where? Once in from, once in python, once in from and once in our college. So in this way we have different functions in python which we can use. In fact there are many more functions apart from this. Like if I write string dot, so all these functions that Visual Studio Code is suggesting to me, all these are valid functions for string in Python. Which we can explore if we want to. Rest, there is no point in reading all the functions as such. We have seen all these functions just because so that we get a basic idea that strings are very powerful in Python. In fact, when we will learn better concepts in future, we will be using these string functions or string properties a lot. So, let's solve some practice questions on these properties. Let's come to our first practice question which is write a program to input user's first name and print its length. That means first we have to take the first name of the user as input. We had already learnt to take input in our first lecture. And then we have to print the length of the input which we have already learnt to take input in our first lecture and then that input which we have taken in string, we have to print its length, so here before solving mine you have to pause and you have to try to solve this question on your own, after that if we can solve or not, it does not matter but we have to try once and after that we can see the solution, let's remove all of it and first of all let's do our input enter your name and we will store it in a string named name and then we have to print length of your name is len of name. Let's save it and run. Let's suppose I write my name to be Shraddha, then the length of my string will be equal to 7. In this way if we write Aman, then the length of the string will be equal to 4. So we can write any name and we will get the length printed. Let's move on to the second question. Write a program to find the occurrence of dollar in a string. That means how many times does dollar come in a string, we have to print the number of occurrences, that is count. For that we can simply use our count method, we can use the count function. Hi, I am the dollar symbol, dollar 99.99. So in this way we have made any random string. And we can simply print string.count. I have to count the occurrence of dollar. So I know that in my string dollar sign comes 3 times. Let's run it and we will have this number 3. So in this way we can use our string functions when we are dealing with strings. Next we are going to read one more important concept which is conditional statements. Now there are many different conditions in life. For example, we can apply for a voter ID or license only when when our age is 18 plus or there is a condition on our marks. Like if our marks are 90 plus then also we may be getting grade A, if it is between 80 to 90 then also we may be getting grade B. So, in this way there are different different conditions which exist in life. We can express all these conditions in code also. We can express all these conditions in code also. To write conditions in code, we use if, elif and else syntax. Syntax means rules of programming, how to write something. For example, if we want to write a function, like print statement, we will write it like this. This is syntax in Python, syntax the correct way to write code. So now we are going to learn the correct way to write conditional statements. In conditional statements, first of all we will talk about if. Whenever we want to do something on the basis of a condition. For example, if our age is 18 plus, then only we can apply for our license. So we can write if as a keyword and after that we can write a condition in parenthesis. Condition can be anything. Condition can be like we have an age variable whose value is greater than equal to 18. What is this? This is a condition. Condition is basically anything which returns the value of true or false. In condition we can simply write a boolean variable the value of true or false. In condition we can write a boolean variable in which either true or false is present. So if there is a condition in statement which returns true, then any work we write in if, i.e. statement 1 is executed. Let's write this once practically. For example, we make a variable age equals 21. Now if we want that if age is 18 plus, then on its basis we have to decide whether we can apply for license or not. So for that we can write if and then our parenthesis. In parenthesis we will write if age is greater than equal to 18 and then we put colon and then next line. and after that in parenthesis we will write if age is greater than equal to 18 and then we will put colon and then next line now here we have to keep in mind that the next line which will start after this colon we will start that line with a tab space or with 4 spaces in visual studio code by default tab means 4 spaces only so either we will be giving 4 spaces one two three four or by default in visual studio code as soon as we press enter we will come to the distance of the space of the tab and here we will be writing our next statement, this means this statement will be executed when our if statement means if condition will be true so in that case we want to print can vote and apply for license we can print this type of statement so we save it and run it so what will come here here as soon as condition is true means value of age is obviously greater than or equal to 18 so it will give us true and in that case we will print can vote and apply for license but here here if we would have done 16, saved and run, then this time nothing would have been printed for us. If we want, as soon as the statement is true, then there should be two things, then what can we do for that, here we can do our second work, that is, our first statement is done and here we can define our second statement also. So here we can write can drive and can vote. So in this way we can execute two statements together. Let's make our age greater than 18. After saving, we have executed both the lines. Now in this statement, if we wanted, we could have written simply true instead of condition. Simply if we had written simply true, like this, then these statements will be executed for us every time. Now, as we have if, if means if this thing is true then this work should be done. Similarly, we have lf. lf means, if we want to read its expanded version, then we can read it as else if. If the first statement is not true, then we will check this statement in that case. So here in the next line we can write elif and by writing elif we can execute any other statement. For example, we take the example of traffic lights. For example, the color take the example of traffic lights. Let's suppose we have taken the color of our light as green. So here we can check that if the value of our light is red, then what we can do is stop it. In traffic lights, we have three colors red, yellow and green. Red means stop, green means go and yellow means look. So here if our light is red then we have to stop elif means if light is not red then we can check for one more condition that is our light green? if light is green then we will put colon again in next line then we will print go in that case and if light is not green then if we want we can write another lf statement, if our light is yellow then in that case we can print wait or look, we can save and execute, so because our light is green then how will code execution work, in code it will be executed such a way that first we will check whether light is equal to red, obviously it is not. Then we will come to this statement, is light equal to green? Yes, light is equal to green. So in that case we will print go, so here we have got go printed in the output. And as soon as a statement will be executed, then the code will not see the statements after that. Means we will ignore this statement and come out. So here in fact we can also print in the last. End of code save and run. So we have printed go and then end of code. If we want, we can write any number of ifs and any number of elifs in our code in sequence. If we wanted, we could have made this elif as if, so we could have written 3 if statements in this way. And if we wanted, we could have made all of these as elifs. But whenever an elif comes, we always have to write an if statement in the beginning. Now what is the difference between if and elif? There is only such a difference between if and elif that if statement will always check. Means this if statement will always check for the condition. But elif statement will only check when if condition will give false. For example, let's comment out this code once. For example, we have a number. Number is equal to 5. We want to check here that if our number's value is greater than 5 or greater than 3 or 2, then in that case we will print greater than 2 and if we check by doing if here if our number is greater than 3 then in that case we will print greater than 3. Let's save it and execute it. So what will happen first of all our number will be checked if 5 is greater than 2 then we will print greater than 2. Then it will be checked if is because then it will be checked every time. If 5 is greater than 3 then we will print greater than 2 then check if is because then every time check will be 5 is greater than 3 then we will print greater than 3 so in this case when we use if then both the statements will be executed but as soon as we write elif here we will save and rerun then only one statement will be true that is the first one is true only that is true we will not check for second condition in case of elif we check only when our first statement is false. Now as we have if and if, similarly we have an else statement. If and if we can write many times, the beginning is always with if, but else statement we write only once and we are always writing the else statement at the end. Else statement means we do not check any condition in it. Else statement means that we don't check any condition in it. Else statement means that if all the conditions above are false, then else will be run. That means, in our case of traffic light, we come back. For example, in this code, if our light is not red, green or yellow, it means light is broken. Definitely, if we see blue color in traffic light then it doesn't make sense as such. So in this case we can write an else statement, we will put colon means we don't have to check any condition in else statement and here we can print light is broken. For example our traffic light color is pink, so in this case this condition will give false, this will give false, this will also false, so we will get this thing printed. If we execute then we will get print light is broken. Similarly if we make yellow here, then in that case we will get print look. Because red condition will give false, this will give false, here as soon as it is true, this will get printed, in that case else statement will not run. If we want then we can use if and else also. Let's comment out this, let's take our voting example. Let's suppose our age is equal to 24. So, here we can check if our age value is greater than or equal to 18. So, in that case we can print can vote. And we can write a else case if greater than equal to 18 is not there if this statement is false then we have to print in that case cannot vote we can save and execute in this case can vote and when it will be aged equal to 14 in that case we will get print cannot vote so in this way our if, elif and else statements work. Now these are very basic examples, later when we will explore different concepts, we will be writing conditional statements many times. Now here one more thing, whenever we give the space of in else or in elif, this thing is called indentation in programming. Indentation means proper spacing. Generally if we are coming from C, C++, Java background then we must have heard or seen that we combine multiple statements with the help of block of code. That thing does not happen in Python. To write multiple statements in Python, we are using indentation or proper spacing instead of curly braces. That is why indentation or proper spacing is very important in Python from a programming point of view. So these were our basics of conditional statements. Now through one more example, we will understand conditional statements better. For example, we have to write a code, a program in which we want to give grade to our students based on their marks. That means the student who has 90 plus marks should get grade A, the student who has between 80 and 90 should get B, the one who has between 80 and 70 should get C and if he has less than 70 then he should get D. obviously this is a very harsh way of assigning grades but for simplicity we assume that this system is running in a college so how we will convert this system in a code basically its practical scenario is that we have written a program of python in which teacher can enter the marks of the students and for those students grade system will be made as report card. So we have to create this system. So to create this we will use conditional statements. First of all let's come to our first condition. In first condition let's suppose we already have marks. So we will check whether our marks are greater than or equal to 90. If our marks are greater than or equal to 90, then our grade will be 1 equal. After that if this does not happen, then we will check the second condition i.e. Elif. In Elif we will check whether our marks are greater than 80 and less than 90. To check this we have to use our logical operators. That means we will first check whether our marks are greater than or equal to 80. Now greater than or equal to 80 can have any value. Then we will check and, that means if we want to check in our range then we will write and marks are less than 90. So in this way using logical operator we can combine our two conditions. Means marks greater than equal to 80 should be there plus marks less than 90 should also be there. So this statement will also be true and this will also be true. Means marks are in range of 80 to 90. So only our final statement will be true, means marks are in range of 80 to 90, then only our final statement will be true, so in this way we use logical operators in our programming, that both the statements are true then only marks are in our range, in that case what we will print, in that case our grade will be BK equal, and in this way we can write all our statements, once we write its code, for example we have some marks, Let's suppose the marks are equal to 74. We can start writing our conditions. If our marks are greater than or equal to 80 and marks are less than 90. In that case our grade will be B. Next we are going to write L if our marks are greater than or equal to 70 and marks are less than 80 so in that case grade is going to be C and here we can write our else case else grade is going to be equal to D and in last we can print grade of the student are grade. Let's save and refresh so grade of the student is going to be C. Now here the marks we can take it as input from the user. Enter student marks. Let's save it and let's run it. Let's suppose our student's marks are 94 equal. Let's cast it into int, save and run. So student's marks are 94, the grade is going to be A. Again we can check, student's marks are 67, grade is going to be D. Student's marks are 88, the grade is going to be B. So in this way we have made a complete program for ourselves in which something is getting input, then some operation is being performed, then finally we are doing some output. Generally, programs work in the same way in programming languages. That is, first we are taking some input, then we perform some operations, and finally some output is done, which as a result we send out from our program. Now with conditional statements, there is also something called nesting. Nesting means writing if statement inside if. That means, when we write another statement inside one statement. For example, we have written a condition. This is how our if statement is. And inside this, when we write another if statement, that is, this proper spacing, with it, in some other condition, if we want, we can write another if statement with some other condition, then we have to give a gap from here and we can print anything here. This phenomenon is called nesting in programming. Nesting is writing the second statement in one statement. And this is completely valid in Python. For example, we have age, let's suppose the age is equal to 34, we are checking if the age is greater than or equal to 18, in that case we are printing can drive something like this and else we are printing cannot drive. Now, there is no upper age limit for driving but for example we have an imaginary upper age limit that driving is not possible from 80+. We imagine a scenario like this. imagine. So here in this statement if we want to check that once the age is greater than equal to 18, if we want to check in that if the age is also greater than equal to 80, so here we want to print something. Let's suppose we want to print cannot drive, in this way we want to print something but if this thing is not true then in that case we want to print this thing so this code is also completely valid in fact what we are using in this code we are using nesting in this code nesting means to write other statements in one if statement save it if age is 34 then in this case it will be printed can drive but as soon as we will make our age let's suppose 95 save and rerun then in that case it will be printed cannot drive so here as soon as first statement will be true then we will go inside and check second statement again if this is true then we will print this thing and if this thing is false then we will print this statement so in this way nesting also works in programming here we have seen nesting in conditional statements in future we will read important concept of loops in next lectures in which we can do nesting in loops also now let's come to some practice questions first of all we have to try to solve these practice questions ourselves and after that we can see it with the class. First practice question is write a program to check if a number entered by the user is odd or even. Now to solve this question let's think about odd and even numbers. Our odd numbers can start from 1, 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13 all these are our odd numbers. Similarly we have even numbers, in even numbers we have 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14 and so on. Now odd and even numbers have a special property, all the even numbers, all the even numbers, can we say that they are multiples of 2, all the even numbers come in the table of 2. Or there is another better way to say that they are multiples of 2, all the even numbers come in the table of 2. Or there will be another better way to say that all the even numbers are completely divided by 2. That means if we divide any even number by 2, then always the remainder will be 0. Like if we divide 14 by 2, then the remainder is going to be equal to 0. So can we say that any number, if it is divided by 2 and gives 0 as the remainder, then it is an even number. We can definitely say that. If any number is divided by 2 and gives 0 the remainder, if its value is 0, then it means it is an even number. And any number which does not give a remainder of 0, all the remaining numbers are odd numbers. Let's check this thing, i.e. convert it in the program. Let's suppose we have some number equal to 40. Now here we can either find out a remainder first, numModulo2. If our remainder is equal to 0, then we can print even in that case. And in the else case, we can print odd, like this. In fact, this number can be taken as input from the user. Enter number. Save and run. First of all we will enter our number 14. Our 14 is an even number. Or if we enter 1, 1 is an odd number. So this way we can calculate or directly we can calculate and check this remainder check instead of creating a new variable. We have saved and refreshed, the number 24 is an even number and the number 17 is an odd number. Let's come to the next question. Next question is, write a program to find the greatest of 3 numbers entered by the user. That means the user will give us 3 numbers A, B and C. This can be anything. We have to write a program which will find out the largest value from these 3. For example, let's suppose A has 4, B has 5 and C has 7. So, in this way we have 3 numbers. Now, first of all we can check that is A greater than B? If A is greater than B and A is greater than C then in that case what can we say that if A is greater than both the numbers then our greatest number will be A or if it is not like that, means A is not the greatest number then in L if we can check that is B greater than C? We obviously know that if the first statement is not true then it means A is not the greatest number. So it means either B is greatest or C is greatest. So first check if B is greater than C? If B is greater than C then it means B is greater number and in the case of else it is C greater number. Let's write it in the code once and see. Let's suppose we enter the number, input it from the user or enter first number, we will store it in A and similarly we will enter these numbers, we will store one in B and one in C. First of all we will check if A is greater than B and we can also say greater than equal to B and A is greater than equal to print. First number is greatest or largest and first number's value also gets printed which is a. lf if it becomes greater than or equal to c then in that case we will print number 2nd is the largest 2nd is largest and we will print the value of b and in the else case we obviously know that our number c will be the greatest so 3rd is largest and c we will save it and run it first of all let's suppose we input 4, in second number we input 5 and in third number we input 7. So the answer is third is largest which is 7. If we want we can run our code with some different values. Let's suppose first number is 99, second number is 201 and third number is 87. Our largest number will be second number which is equal to 201. So, in this way our program is finished. Here I will give you a homework problem that as we have written code to find out largest of 3, similarly you have to write code to find out largest of 4 numbers. And you have to think this code first logically on paper pen and after that we will convert it in Python code. Now let's come to our third question, in third question it says write a program to check if a number is a multiple of 7 or not, any number is a multiple of any other number when its remainder is 0, means if we take any number x and if we want to check what is this multiple of 7 then its remainder should be 0. For example, for x is equal to 7 or for 14 or 21 or 28, for all these numbers with 7 their remainder will be 0. So all these numbers will become multiple of 7. We can also write code for this. Let's suppose we took a number input, let's call it x, enter number and if whatever number is x, its remainder with 7 turns out to be 0, then in that case we will print multiple of 7 and in the else case we will print not a multiple. So we save it and enter. We entered 21 so 21 is a multiple of 7 and if we enter again let's suppose 16, so 16 is not a multiple of 7 and we can check this not only for 7 but for any number. For example we can check if any number is multiple of 5 save and run if we enter 25 then 25 is a multiple of 5 but if we enter 27 then 27 is not a multiple of 5 so this is the basic code by which we have practiced our questions obviously when we do real life programming the logic we build there is more complex than this. But for that as a beginner we have many more different concepts in python which we have to learn. So I hope that from today's lecture we will be learning more concepts about python language. keep learning and keep practicing.

# Lecture 3
